hi thank you so five years ago this is
me I would say PhD student at Harvard
and I love to travel I had just gotten
engaged to marry the love of my life I
was 28 and like so many of us when we
are in good health I felt like I was
invincible then one day I had a fever of
104 point seven degrees I probably
should have gone to the doctor but I've
never really been sick in my life and I
knew that usually if you have a virus
you stay home and you make some chicken
soup and in a few days everything will
be fine
but this time it wasn't fine after the
peeper brew for three weeks I was so
dizzy I couldn't leave my health I would
walk straight into door frames I had two
husbands just to make it to the bathroom
that spring I got infection after
infection and every time I went to the
doctor he said there was absolutely
nothing wrong
he had his laboratory test which always
came back normal all I had were my
symptoms which I could describe but no
one else can see I know it sounds silly
but you have to find a way to explain
things like this to yourself and so I
thought maybe I was just aging maybe
this is what it's like to be on the
other side of 25
then the neurological symptoms started
sometimes I would find that I couldn't
draw the right side of a circle
other times I wouldn't be able to speak
or move at all I saw every kind of
specialist the infectious disease
doctors rheumatologists endocrinologist
cardiologists I even saw it's like Hyatt
rest'
my psychiatrist said it's clearly really
sick but not with anything psychiatric I
hope they can find out what's wrong with
you the next day my neurologist
diagnosed me with conversion disorder he
told me that everything the fever is a
sore throat sinus infection all the
gastrointestinal neurological and
cardiac symptoms were being caused by
some distance emotional trauma that I
could not remember the symptoms were
real he said but they had no biological
cause I was training to be a social
scientist I had studies statistics
probability theory mathematical model
experimental design I felt like I
couldn't just reject my neurologists
diagnosis it didn't feel true but I knew
from my training at the truth is often
counterintuitive so easily obscured but
what we want to believe and so I had to
consider the possibility that he was
right that day I ran a small experiment
I lost back the two miles from a
neurologists office to my house my legs
wrapped in this strange a most electric
kind of pain I meditated on that pain
contemplating how my mind could have
possibly generated all this as soon as I
walked to the door I collapsed my brain
and my spinal cord were burning my mass
is so stiff I couldn't touch my chin to
my chest and the slightest sounds the
rustling of the sheets my husband
walking barefoot in the next room could
cause excruciating pain
I would spend most of the next two years
in bed how could my daughter had gotten
it so wrong I thought I had a rare
disease something doctors have never
seen and then I went online and found
thousands of people all over the world
living with the same symptoms
similarly isolated similarly disbelieved
some could still work but had to spend
their evenings and weekends in bed just
so they could show up the next Monday on
the other end of the spectrum some were
so sick they had to live in complete
darkness unable to tolerate
the sound of a human voice or the touch
of a loved one I was diagnosed with
myalgic encephalomyelitis you probably
heard it called chronic fatigue syndrome
for decades that's the name that's meant
that this has them a dominant image of a
disease that can be as serious as this
the key symptom we all share is that
whenever we exert ourselves physically
mentally we pay and we pay hard if my
husband goes for a run we might be sore
for a couple of days if I try to walk
half a block I might be bedridden for a
week it is a perfect custom prison I
know ballet dancers who can't dance
accountants you can't add medical
students who never became doctors it
doesn't matter what you once were you
can't do it anymore
it spent four years and I still never
been as well as I was the minute before
I walked home from my neurologists
office it's estimated at about 15 to 30
million people around the world hapis
disease in the US where I'm from it's
about 1 million people that makes it
roughly twice as common as multiple
sclerosis patients can live for decades
the physical function of someone with
congestive heart failure 25% of us are
homebound or bedridden and 75 to 85% of
us can't even work part time yet doctors
do not treat us
and science does not study us how could
a disease this common and this
devastating have been forgotten by
medicine when my doctor diagnosed me
with conversion disorder
he was revoking a lineage of ideas about
women's bodies that are over 2500 years
old the Roman physician Galen thought
that hysteria was caused by sexual
deprivation and particularly passionate
women the Greeks thought that the uterus
literally dry up and wander on the body
in search of moisture pressing on
internal organs
yes causing symptoms from extreme
emotions to dizziness and paralysis the
cure was marriage and motherhood these
ideas went largely unchanged for several
millennia until the 1880s when
neurologists tried to modernize this
theory of hysteria Sigmund for a
develops a theory that the unconscious
mind could produce physical symptoms
when dealing with memories or emotions
too painful for the conscious mind to
handle it converted these emotions to
physical symptoms
this meant that men can now get a stereo
but of course women were still the most
susceptible when I began investigating
the history of my own disease I was
amazed to find how deep these ideas
still run in 1934 198 doctors nurses and
staff at the Los Angeles County General
Hospital became seriously ill they had
muscle weakness tifus in the neck and
back fevers all of the same symptoms I
had when I first got diagnosed doctors
thought that it was a new form of polio
since then there have been more than 70
outbreaks documented around the world of
a strikingly similar post infectious
disease all of these outbreaks have
tended to disappear in fact women and in
time when doctors failed to find the one
cause of the disease they thought that
these outbreaks were mass hysteria
why has this idea had such staying power
I do you think it has to do with sexism
but I also think that fundamentally
doctors want to help they want to know
the answer
and this category allows doctors to
treat what would otherwise be
untreatable to explain illnesses I have
no explanation the problem is that this
can cause real harm in the 1950s it's
like hiatus named Elliot Slater studied
a cohort at 85 patients who had been
diagnosed with hysteria nine years later
12 of them were dead and 30 had become
disabled many had undiagnosed conditions
like multiple sclerosis epilepsy brain
tumors in 1980 hysteria was officially
renamed conversion disorder when my
neurologist gave me that diagnosis in
2012 he was echoing for its words
verbatim and even today women are 2 to
10 times more likely to receive that
diagnosis the problem with the theory of
hysteria or psychogenic illness is that
it can never be proven it is by
definition the absence of evidence and
in the case of any psychological
explanations of held-back biological
research all around the world
Emme is one of the least funded diseases
so in the u.s. we spend each year
roughly $2,500 per AIDS patients two
hundred and fifty dollars per ms
patients and just five dollars per year
per any patients this was not just
lightning I was not just unlucky the
ignorance surrounding my disease has
been a choice a choice made by the
institutions that were supposed to
protect us we don't know why I need
sometimes runs in families while you can
get it after almost any instruction from
enteroviruses to epstein-barr virus to Q
fever or why it affects women at two to
three times the rate of men this issue
is much bigger than just my disease when
I first got sick old friends that are
reaching out to me and I soon found
myself a part of a cohort of women in
their late 20s whose bodies were falling
apart
what was striking was just how much
hello we were having being taken
seriously I learned of one woman with
Larry Dharma and OTO being connected
tissue disease who was told for years
that it was all in her head between the
time of on
that in diagnosis her esophagus was so
thoroughly damaged she will never be
able to eat again and as I open with
ovarian cancer who for years was told
that it was just early menopause a
friend from college whose brain tumor
was misdiagnosed for years as anxiety
here's why this worries me since the
1950s rates of many autoimmune diseases
have doubled tripled 45% of patients who
are eventually diagnosed with a
recognized autoimmune disease are
initially told that they are
hypochondriacs likely as variables this
is everything to do with gender and with
whose stories we believe 75% of
autoimmune disease patients are women
and in some diseases that that's high as
90% even though these diseases
disproportionately affect women they are
not women's diseases and the effects
children and any effects millions of men
and as one patient told me we get it
coming and going if you're a woman
you're told that you're exaggerating
your symptoms but if you're a guy you're
told to be strong to back up and men may
even have a more difficult time getting
diagnosed
my brain is not what it used to be
here's the good part despite everything
I still have hope so many so many
diseases were once thought of as
psychological until science uncovered
their biological mechanisms patients
with epilepsy could be forcibly
institutionalized until the EEG was able
to measure abnormal electrical activity
in the brain
multiple sclerosis could be misdiagnosed
as hysterical paralysis until the cat
scan and the MRI discovered brain
lesions and recently we used to think
that summit ulcers were just caused by
stress and so we discovered that h
pylori was the culprit amy has never
benefited from the kind of science that
other diseases have had but that's
starting to change in Germany scientists
are starting to find evidence of
autoimmunity and in Japan of brain
inflammation in the u.s. scientists of
Stanford or finding abnormalities in
energy metabolism that are 16 standard
deviations away from normal and in
Norway researchers are running a phase 3
clinical trial on a cancer drug that in
some patients causes complete remission
what also gives me hope is the
resilience of patients online we came
together and we shared our stories we
devoured what research there was we
experimented on ourselves we became our
own scientists and our own doctors
because we had to be and slowly I added
5% here 5% there until eventually on a
good day I was able to leave my home I
still had to make ridiculous choices
well I sit in the gardening for 15
minutes or will I wash my hair today but
it gave me hope that I could be treated
I had a sick body that was all and with
the right kind of help maybe one day I
could get better and I came together
with patients around the world and we
started to fight we have filled the void
with something wonderful
but it is not enough I still don't know
if I'll ever be able to run again or
walk at any distance or do any of those
kinetic things that I now only get to do
in my dreams but I am so grateful for
how far I have come
progress is slow and it is up and it is
down but I am getting a little better
each day I remember what it was like
when I was stuck in that bedroom when it
happened months since I had seen the Sun
I thought that I would die there but
here I am today with you and that is the
miracle I don't know what would have
happened had I not been one of the lucky
ones how they had gotten sick before the
Internet
had I not found my community I probably
would have already taken my own life as
so many others have done how many lives
could we have saved decades ago if we
had asked the right questions how many
lives could we save today if we decide
to make a real start even once the true
cause of my disease is discovered if we
don't change our institutions and our
culture we will do this again to another
disease living with this illness has
taught me that science and medicine are
profoundly human endeavours doctors
scientists and policy makers are not
immune to the same biases that affect
all of us we need to think in more
nuanced ways about women's health our
immune systems are just as much of
battlegrounds for equality as the rest
of our bodies we need to listen to
patients stories and we need to be
willing to say I don't know I don't know
is a beautiful thing I don't know if
we're discovery starts and if we can do
that
if we can approach the great vastness of
all that we do not know and then rather
than for your uncertainty
maybe we can greet it with a sense of
wonder thank you